---
title: ruby -run
categories: ['Ruby', 'Tooling', 'Productivity']
tags: ['ruby', 'run', 'unix', 'linux', 'bash', 'shell', 'one-liners', 'windows']
img: /img/posts/matrix-binary.jpg
img_caption: >-
  <a href="https://www.freepik.com/free-vector/matrix-style-binary-code-digital-background-with-falling-numbers_8289995.htm">Image by starline</a> on Freepik
description: >-
  One-liners and cross-platform unix tools with ruby -run
---

*This is a loose translation of [my post](https://habr.com/en/post/319002/) from 2017*


Recently, I was looking for a one-liner to start a web-server in the current
directory. Stack Overflow gave me this command:

{% highlight bash %}
ruby -run -e httpd -- -p 9090 [DIR]
{% endhighlight %}

So what is this mysterious `-run` option an why is it not in the ruby manual?

<!--more-->

# Option `-run`

In reality, `-run` is not an option. More precisely, it's an option, but not
"run". Notice that there's one dash instead of two.

Turns out, it's just an option `-r` with an argument `un`. And `un` is a file in
ruby standard library (*2023 edit: now available on [Github](https://github.com/ruby/un)*). It defines a few
useful methods to use in one-liners as standalone programs.

One of the methods is `httpd` which just start `WebBrick` with parameters from
`ARGV` (in the case above, it's just port and directory).


# Availability

Apparently, it's a really old file beceause I found its documentation for ruby
`1.8.6`. So you can use it freely.


# What else is in there?

Here's a copypaste from the docs:

{% highlight bash %}
ruby -run -e cp -- [OPTION] SOURCE DEST
ruby -run -e ln -- [OPTION] TARGET LINK_NAME
ruby -run -e mv -- [OPTION] SOURCE DEST
ruby -run -e rm -- [OPTION] FILE
ruby -run -e mkdir -- [OPTION] DIRS
ruby -run -e rmdir -- [OPTION] DIRS
ruby -run -e install -- [OPTION] SOURCE DEST
ruby -run -e chmod -- [OPTION] OCTAL-MODE FILE
ruby -run -e touch -- [OPTION] FILE
ruby -run -e help [COMMAND]
{% endhighlight %}


# Outro

I think there's not much point in using `un` outside of one-liners since its
every method uses `ARGV` but it's useful to remember that ruby has it. I imagine
it'll work in Windows too bringing a way to use Unix-tools in it.

BTW, I added this alias to my bash config:

{% highlight bash %}
alias start-webrick='ruby -run -e httpd -- -p 9090'
{% endhighlight %}

Really convenient!
